Welcome back it's time to sort some morays let's grab this function put it at the very end because hopefully
it'll work at the very end.
And
start writing our code.
We'll start off by first defining the function called merge sort interface.
It's going to take the first parameter which is the first array then the second parameter which is the
secondary I'm going to first define some variables that we're going to use throughout the function.
The first one will be a constant which is merged array which will be our answer.
For now it's going to be an empty array.
And we might as well just make sure that we return this merged array at the end.
Hopefully it all works and we can populate this with these two arrays.
Now in here I want to grab the array one item just for reference and this is going to be our very first
array item.
So this simply has the zero item here.
And our first array
and then we'll do the same thing.
Array 2 item
which is going to grab the number four from here.
Now the very first thing I like doing in a function is checking for some sort of input making sure that
everything
works I'm going to spare you the time of me doing this because you should have an idea of how to check
whether it's an array whether you have two parameters.
But the one input that I think is worth checking is what if we have something like this.
Where the second array is just an empty rate.
In our case we can just return the first rate.
Because while it's already sorted we're still merging the two rays but the other array doesn't have
anything.
And that's the same if this first array was just empty as well.
So to avoid any X sure work let's check for those conditions so that right away we can give out the
answer and make our function more efficient.
In those cases.
So I can just do an if statement.
I'll say aere want lenth if that is equal to zero.
So if first array is empty.
Just simply return the secondary
and we can do the same for the other case if array to lenth is empty then we can just return the first
array nice and simple.
For now let's get into the harder topic which is what happens if both of these arrays are full like
they are now.
Well just to change things up because I've been using the for loops for a while I'll use the while loop
in javascript and this simply says loop through the items while a condition is met.
In our case I'm going to say while there is an array one item or there is an array 2 Item
do something and remember these variables are simply for now the first item in each one of the arrays
and by the way if you're wondering why sometimes I use cost sometimes I use LET.
Well cost means that once I assign this variable to this array I can't modify it.
I can't say merged array equals to two.
It's going to give me a warning because it's a constant I can add things to the array but I can't change
this reference to the array.
On the other hand let allows me to do that.
So later on I can say array one item equals to something new like array one in the index of one.
So that is why we're using this syntax.
It's a new ESX syntax and Javascript.
All right.
So while we have things and the arrays we want to first do a bit of a check let's say if array one item
is less than Array 2 item that is if 0 is less than 4 we want to add to the mystery empty array.
We want to say push and we'll push the first item in the array.
So we're going to push 0 and because we've now pushed the zero item into this array we don't really
need to worry about zero anymore.
So we can just simply say array one item is now going to equal array one at index of.
Right because now we want to move to array item.
That's over here at index 1 which is 3 so that we can compare three with four.
Now we want to increment this every time.
And because we are doing a loop here let's convert this into an index that is high and incremented by
plus plus.
And at the top over here we can just say for the beginning that by is going to equal one.
So that way as we loop through this this is going to increment with I plus plus of that is increment
by 1 so that we can go 0 3 4 31 and by the way I just noticed that I can't spell the shabby array over
here her 8.
Now that's the case when array one item is less than array to the list to the other side.
If array 2 item is less than Array 1 we now merge into the array.
Array to item because if array one item is not less than array to item we don't even need to add a condition
here.
We know that array one item is greater than the array two items in which case we can just add the second
item.
So that is we add this item instead.
And again we want to do the exact same thing that we did with the first item or the first array.
That is the array to item is now going to equal array to and we need a different index of this.
We can use the same one rate so we can just say this is going to be J and appear.
We simply do the same thing.
J is going to equal to 1.
So once we figured out the zero index items we can then move on to index of one than index of two index
of three.
So on and so forth.
Now let's check this code and see if it works.
If I run this oh you'll see that my browser just crashed.
And that's because I have a setting on REPL that ID which allows for while for this to happen most likely
if you're using the default settings here it will give you a warning.
But let's go back
why did that happen.
This is why it's always a good idea to go step by step and make sure things work.
We did a lot of coding here without actually testing if any of this works.
So good note here is to pause every once in a while and just test your assumptions lugged out the answers.
In this case we missed a critical point that is in this check over here if we do the while loop as long
as array one item or array two items are populated and we check here if array one item is less than
Array 2 item.
But the problem here is that we could have a case where one of these because we're using or could be
undefined or we reached the end of the line in order to account for that.
The critical thing to do here is to always know how your code is running so let's do a canceled or lock
here say horæ want item man array to item.
Let's see what we get throughout the loop.
If I run this it's going to crash again and we won't be able to see our logs.
So I'm just going to write down the correct version here and then explain why we did what we did.
I'm going to just say if re to item
if the array to item doesn't exist so if we have undefined it's going to turn this into true.
So we ran through this.
Why is that.
Let's have a look.
Notice what we just locked here.
We've logged every one item then array two item.
So this is why we're comparing throughout our loops zeros more then 3 and 4 then for him for then four
and six then 31 and six 31 and 30 and then 31 and on define you see here how the second array item becomes
undefined.
And in order for us to bypass this undefined which becomes one defined here and we use the exclamation
mark in javascript to turn this into a true statement.
So it turns into this so that we can add the Thirty-One in array one into the final slot of the array.
Now if this was like this and I run
we get undefined for the first array.
However because we're doing the second check which is is array one item less than Array 2 item and in
our case if we do on defined less than 6 which is what we're doing here in this comparison.
If I run this and let's Konsole the log this see what the answer is I get false.
So even though in this time around array one is undefined because we've gone through it because this
statement is false.
We go to the else statement and filled the rest of the array with 6 and 13 or 30 which come from array
to
I wanted to point this out to you because this may now be the cleanest solution right.
I mean looking at this code just think about what I had to explain and draw out for you to fully understand
how this works.
I and I did this for a specific reason during the interview.
If you have to explain things in detail like this and write things out well perhaps there's a better
way of writing it.
Because an interviewer is going to get confused as to what this means then what this means and it doesn't
really read like English does it.
Ideally these functions are really really nice to just read.
So perhaps I can take this part of the function and convert it into its own function and just name this
has should push first array item.
And this should be should push array to item and by extracting out these pieces of code into their own
little function.
You can clean out this answer and make it more readable and interviewers are going to like that.
Now during an interview you may not have time to do so but you can let the interviewer know how you
wrote the solution and you understand that this is probably not the most readable solution and this
is what you would do to clean it up.
You don't have to actually code it as long as you tell them and you understand where you would improve
things.
That in an interviewer's eyes is just as good as you actually coding it that way.
All right looks like this is working.
If I do an empty array here I see that it's still working our answer is looking good.
Hope you got this far.
I'll see you in the next video by.